This video is brought to you by surf shark, VPN.
What's up guys? Michael here don't freak out,
but I want to talk to you today about reality dating shows and love. Now I know,
I know they're fake trashy and probably bad for your brain,
but what if we can learn something in the midst of these named cat fights over
champagne bottles,
the unbelievability absurdity and straight up tacking this of these shows has
led many,
a spoilsport grownup to declare reality TV dating shows a uniquely modern plague
signaling the complete collapse of society. And honestly, we get it,
but maybe in this producer, fabricated reality,
there's actually nothing particularly modern or new going on.
What have we told you that the very things we mock reality TV stars for doing on
the respect of dating shows STEM from weird love standards invented by dreamy
eyed writers in the 18th and 19th century and worse.
What if we told you that your probably just as guilty of it as this very
unpleasant man, welcome to this wisecracking edition on reality.
TV's lies about love and spoilers ahead for your own love life.
But before we get into it, I want to give a shout out to this week. Sponsors,
surf, shark VPN. A VPN is an invaluable tool to have,
especially when you spend all your time online. Right now,
I am using my credit card all over the internet, getting books, running movies,
and even purchasing groceries for pickup.
It makes me nervous to input my info on so many different sites, but with a VPN,
I know that I'm safe while connected to a VPN.
All of my information is encrypted.
So my passwords and bank info are all protected from cyber attacks.
Surcharge VPN lets me connect to servers all over the world and it works on all
my devices. So I'm safe. Even when I'm mobile shopping from the couch,
surf shark goes above and beyond the traditional VPN by offering additional
security for any online habits. For example,
blind search blocks targeted sites from appearing in your search results and
clean web Black's ads, trackers and malware. It's great.
If you don't want any sites to collect your data and make sure the best online
experience, if you use the link in the description right now,
you can get served shark VPN for 85% off its normal price.
Plus three extra months for free go to surf
shark.deals/wisecrack, or hit the link in the description,
protect yourself online and download search shark VPN today.
And now a quick caveat. There are tons of reality dating shows,
but for our purposes,
we're going to focus on a few culturally significant ones that seem to share a
perspective on love. Specifically,
the bachelor slash bachelorette love is blind and the 90 day fiance televisual
universe. Now look, we know what you're thinking,
why even bother analyzing the way love is portrayed on reality TV when it's ever
more apparent that tons of people are at least partially going on.
These shows in the hopes of scoring some profitable skincare sponsorships,
or at the very least to boost their Instagram following.
I have 310,000 followers right now.
It goes up usually every single day.
Indeed the inherent less for fame that we see on most reality TV dating shows
can't be denied.
And those ulterior motives are a phenomenon in and of themselves. However,
we in some scholars still think it's worthwhile looking at the kinds of romantic
narratives that these actors slash real people,
who we will henceforth referred to as characters choose to enact and that their
producers choose to well produce because even when it's fake or
inauthentic,
these characters are still parroting ideas about love that are upon closer
examination either Jerious strange and also quite ubiquitous for those who are
uninitiated in the trash fire of reality.
Love a quick overview on the bachelor and bachelorette one man or woman.
It's a giant pool of potential soulmates eliminating contestants each week until
they found the person they're apparently going to marry and love is blind.
A few dozen singles date and serve real pods of them ever actually seen one
another and try to find love some, get engaged,
and then try to see if they can successfully make it down the aisle.
On the various 90 day,
fiance shows Americans struggle with their overseas relationships and see where
their love can transcend continents, visa restrictions. I'm sweating.
I'm worried about this, this, this visa now, and lack of air conditioning.
I'm like hot. I'm sweaty.
I'm starting to freak out a little bit. So.
What could these clearly troubled 20 somethings lusting after each other
possibly have to do with 18th and 19th century writers to explain we'll need to
leave through a very brief history of love in Western civilization.
As philosopher Simon may outlines in his book, love a history.
There have been four major transformations in the way Western civilization to
find love.
The first occurred in biblical times and concerned the value of love basically
in this era,
love became the Supreme virtue because it specifically signified the bond
between the human and God. Divine love was at the time all the rage.
The second change began around the fourth century and concerned the power of
love in this framing, loving God could make you yourself divine.
The third change began in the 11th century and was all about the object of love.
I heed the person being loved once. Exclusively reserved for God.
Divine love could be bestowed upon a lowly human being is specially if they were
hot, that brings us to the fourth change, which occurred in the 18th centuries,
spurred in part by the contributions of philosopher and Loverboy.
Jacques were so, and later by other key figures of the romanticism movement,
this change was concerned with the lover who becomes authentic through love from
this perspective,
romantically loving another person is what's really divine and what's more,
it's all but essential to developing your true nature. Ultimately, as Mae puts,
it love comes to fall in love with itself.
Now probably we assume slash hope that people loved each other before the
romantic writers put quilt to paper,
but at any rate there wasn't the same intellectual framework around love.
Loving another person in this era became divine. According to may,
this era of romantic love is still alive and well today. In fact,
he argues that the notion of love is a radical divine experience in which you
discover your true self and become complete. You.
Complete me.
As only become more salient over time. And for two reasons,
first religion has become less important.
Leaving a vacuum in the absence of divine love. Second,
our society has become more individualistic and less explicitly hierarchical.
We can choose our own romantic partners for a little extra context.
For most of history.
Marriage had more to do with property transfer and political alliances than it
ever had to do with lusting over a person who likes the same books issue because
we now have more freedom in the development of our personhood Love's ability to
help us achieve that makes it seem ever more crucial.
And this isn't without its problems.
We're not trying to show on your ideas of fairytale romance, but well, okay.
Maybe we are as a result of hundreds of years of philosophizing about it,
love now labors under the insane expectations that you should essentially feel
about our relationship that we developed.
Lee religious person feels about their God, but Hey, no pressure.
You don't have to take Mae's word for it either.
We all know that society rhapsodizes the craft of romantic love and use a
person's inability to find it as a pretty objective failure.
I'm going to die alone,
but what did these smooch happy writers like were so think love could do for a
person. According to may,
there were two major motifs first that you can achieve personal authenticity
or the quest to become yourself and dedicating yourself to a loved one.
And in being loved second,
the nobility of passion and even sexual desire as a great source of goodness and
truth.
So TLDR a love makes you more authentically yourself and be your passion is
divine. Now to be clear,
we've got no beef with romanticism and its predecessors.
It was indeed a profoundly important movement and affirming the importance of
individuality, of honest,
emotional expression and a host of other generally good occasionally sublime
things. The problem is according to me, our views on love.
Haven't evolved since we're so gushed about is crushed and that's made for a
whole lot of achy breaky hearts.
But what does this all have to do with spending over a hundred thousand dollars
on a woman you met on a sketchy Ukrainian dating site?
A lot actually in his book may outlines many myths about love that have been
propagated by this whole romantic love, his divine idea. And upon inspection,
we realized that reality TV is a masterclass in dumb ideas about love.
So let's go through a few of May's myths myth. Number one,
love is unconditional.
It is neither aroused nor diminished by the other's value or qualities.
It is a spontaneous gift that seeks nothing for the giver.
The notion of unconditional love is according to may the most salient and the
most harmful of all love myths propagated in our society.
And it is also arguably the one most reinforced by many dating shows,
unsurprisingly some of the most horrible toxic people are really into this idea
on the show before the 90 days about Americans finding love abroad,
one couple constantly screams about each other's manipulative behavior,
drinking and alleged physical assault.
She chose shoes at my head.
And yet they persisted at least for awhile.
Why try to power through such unbecoming,
occasionally dangerous behavior from your partner? Well,
it's all in the name of it,
working things out and honoring your true and pure love, which by the way,
if any of these things sound like your own relationship,
please don't or for another example,
consider the guy who immediately breaks off his seemingly normal relationship
with a woman. He just met because in his mind, if she truly loved him,
she would know immediately and unconditionally that you wants to marry him after
knowing him for a few weeks.
Maybe we are no, always too quick.
Similarly,
other subjects who are almost definitely getting scammed and or catfished,
basically,
excuse a long series of red flags is just an obstacle in their fairy tale of
unconditional love.
I know it'll just raise more red flags with my children.
It's easy for them to think bad of Williams and think he's scamming me,
but they don't know him. Like I know him.
The bachelor and the bachelorette where the titular characters starts out dating
over two dozen people,
all of whom are asked to repress their jealousy and their discomfort in the
hopes of finding true love with the lead.
I'm not going to do what Ben did. I'm not going to fall in love with two girls.
I'm going to fall in love with you.
From the get-go.
Each contestant is agreeing to emotionally untenable circumstances filled with
constant jealousy and anxiety in exchange for maybe finding love. And yes,
we know being on TV, but things get even trickier near the end.
When we have four characters,
all of whom typically seem genuinely invested in the lead,
taking them to their home towns. At this point,
it is by now almost formulaically required for each contestant to verbally
express their love to the point where not doing so can literally get them sent
home.
What could be more unconditional than telling someone you love them in the hopes
of forging a monogamous marital relationship while they're dating three other
people. This results in competitively, lavished,
declarations and promises of forever love.
There's nothing I ever wanted more just to look at you and like be here
wherever we are though. You know,
we could be in a little apartment trying to argue about what the paint were put
on the walls. You know, like I just want to be there.
Then look that is sweet as hell.
But as my new love consultant may would put it love, like everything.
Human is conditioned. You probably wouldn't still love your wife.
If she plays the trumpet every day at sunrise or your boyfriend,
if he murdered your cat.
I have this crazy thought that I know is crazy that
maybe Dwight killed my cat.
Onto myths to love transports us beyond the messy imperfections of the everyday
world. And two weeks of superior state purity and perfection.
This is most literally propagated by the format of some of these shows where
contestants are swept away to sublime beaches, surreal modernist pods,
and various beautiful locales all over the globe.
This of course reinforces our notion of love as a fantasy best enacted in
fantasy locations. Then there's the insane requirements demanded of contestants.
You need to drop everything and pursuit of love.
Oftentimes giving up your job in the process.
Everything could be here.
Or if you're a man from San Diego, looking for love in the Philippines,
you might just liquidate your only retirement savings to make one big
romantic play.
But it's also embodied in the way contestants are depicted upon arrival.
They're often posited as missing that special someone I E a partner snoring next
to them in bed.
I wanted to show you that I do have a heart on my finger and it's
open. Okay?
And I hope that you'll be the guy to complete it as your things have happened.
Yes.
Of course this hopeful ladies introduction has darker implications that she is
literally incomplete,
not a fully formed person without romantic love in her life.
Perhaps more troubling me. Our fr mentioned 90 day love searcher.
Darcy expresses hopes that.
He's going to take it upon himself to make me feel like a woman.
Of course,
necessarily implies that Darcy can't embrace a rebel in her own womanhood
without the express approval and assistance of a particular type of man and
onto myth three, that love is our highest duty to ourselves.
Promoting this belief is almost mandatory for any contestants on a reality TV
dating show, As previously mentioned,
new characters are often introduced primarily by their lack or the flaw that has
made them until this point, unable to find.
I deal in produce for one thing I haven't produced yet.
This makes sense purely from a story perspective,
audiences care about characters with defined goals that they pursue.
But here it suggests that this lack of romantic love overwhelms the good of
personal accomplishment, supportive family, and so on. What's more,
the competitive nature of some shows further reinforces the idea that love is an
aspiration, a prize to be won for oneself.
I came here to win this. No girls are getting in my way.
This supports May's notion that the divinity of romantic love is inextricably
tied up with the rise of individualization and self determinism.
You are in charge of your love life and its failures are your failing.
So you better win this contest.
It also manifests and contestants swearing that they don't really fully exist
without the object of their love.
I can't believe it's happened. I have to do all this alone afterwards now.
And keeping with an amaz earlier points in this era of love.
We focus so much on the lover and what they want. And quote,
unquote deserve as to render the beloved, almost an accessory.
You get the sense that this woman could be crying over pilot, Pete,
or Colton or whoever the hell.
This is the point is what the men and women have really invested in is the
idea of loving nowhere.
Is this more apparent than when a catfish the victim on before the 90 days talks
about why he, for example,
flew thousands of miles on several occasions where a girl that's straight up
ghosted him every time.
You tried to go on a cruise with her.
And that didn't happen because of her medical reasons, right? For him, he's.
Invested thousands of hours and dollars into this relationship. Fittingly,
the language of investment comes up a lot on this particular show or when a
woman who is definitely getting catfished,
fondly recalls countless hours of texting and phone calls.
Even after it becomes pretty clear that her English boyfriend is probably a
Nigerian scammer.
Someone who hacked his account, must've got a hold of my address.
You gave away your address. I'm still in love with you.
Now.
Even if all of the clips we've looked at were constructed by devilishly adept
and manipulative producers,
they still demonstrate something important are socially endorsed philosophies
about love taking to their logical extreme,
but what's wrong with hanging onto a few sweet myths about romance? Well,
according to may, the problem is this.
When we view love as all of these magical things,
we set ourselves up for disappointment and upon being disappointed,
our love easily lurches to the opposite, extreme bitterly,
resenting loved ones in whom so much hope had been invested and writing off love
as brutal or impossible.
I
do not believe it loud.
And it's not just renouncing love it's well, this.
We can keep going. Mate.
The reason things get so particularly dramatic and crazy is because in this
case, rejection is very, very public and expectations.
I E lifelong love are very high. Okay.
But you might still be wondering if it's a reality constructed by a SWAT team of
editors who really cares well when reality TV couples parrot cliche ideas
about love for the millions.
It very quickly stops being about them and starts being about us.
Why is that blame it on something called an effect or what scholar Misha Kafka
calls the zone of potential emotions or the primordial soup of feelings.
It also serves as the cusp that brings the individual person into the collective
psyche. According to Kafka,
TB is a remarkably important purveyor of aspect in today's society.
A conjoining divider that connects us to those outside our immediate purview.
When you emote even a little as Tyler's heart is broken,
whereas Darcy pursues love with hopeless vigor.
The TD becomes a conduit of social aspect for you. What's more cop guard used.
The consequences of dating shows for our aspect is particularly salient because
as a work of reality TV, it is a constructed on mediation.
That is a lot of work goes into making it feel like a simulation of reality.
And even though we know that this reality is mediated,
the effect of seen real people dating still,
both simulates as well as stimulates. What's more,
CAFCA argues the choices that these characters have to make mirror the choices
that we, our cells are forced to make in the dating world and imitating while
exaggerating the stakes of our own romantic lives.
Kafka says these shows bring to light aspects of love practices that are indeed
conflictual and contradictory.
That is how are we supposed to find practical lasting love in a world that's
obsessed with both Tinder's wiping and magical soulmates.
So are we all destined to keep parenting myths about love?
Is there any hope for us? Don't despair may has a solution.
He proposes embracing a new different definition of love.
That is based on the feeling he calls ontological rootedness,
or to feel at home in the world to root our life in the here and now to give
our existence solidity and validity.
And he argues that this is literally the only requirement for lasting love.
If ontological rootedness is your only expectation may argues,
you'll be much better equipped to pick a partner who you can actually sustain a
relationship with and you'll be able to do so with significantly less pain,
as compared to the fairy tale in butterflies framework, laundered through media.
I seen her there on that, you know, with that dress,
it was just like seen a Prince it's like a fairy tale.
In other words, as may puts it,
find someone who makes you feel grounded-ness rootedness at homeness. I know,
I know easier said than done, but what do you guys think?
Do reality shows perpetuate harmful myths about love that make us all crazy or
are we overthinking ourselves to death and semi quarantine again,
let us know what you think in the comments. Big,
thanks to our amazing patrons hit that subscribe button and as always,
thanks for watching later.
[Inaudible].